# A Brief History of OpenSSL

## SSL Protocol

When people talk about the history of Internet, an ancient but great name will be always mentioned, Netscape. This company, whose headquarter was located in California, has made a huge contribution to the technical evolution of human beings, including JavaScript, Gecho, Project Mozilla and of course SSL protocol. Back in 1995, Netscape released the first production-ready version of SSL, SSL 2.0. In 1996, Netscape released the SSL 3.0 specification. From then on, a time of encrypted Web traffic has begun. Taher Elgamal, who worked for Netscape as 'Chief Scientist at that time, is recognized as 'father of SSL'.

> Taher Elgamal
> 
> Dr. Taher Elgamal is the creator of the famous ElGamal asymmetric key encryption and signature algorithm, the widely used DSA algorithm is a variant of ElGamal signature algorithm. Dr. Taher Elgamal's Doctoral advisor is Martin Hellman, the 'H' in DH algorithm, and ElGammal alogorithm is based on DH key exchange algorithm. Dr. Taher Elgamal serves as CTO of Security at Salesforce.com.

Netscape has supported SSL protocol in its own product line, including Netscape Navigator and FastTrack, Enterprise web server etc at server side. But since Netscape was an U.S. based company, due to the limit of export of cryptography from the U.S., Netscape's product could not be used outside the U.S. with strong encryption. For instance, at that time, Netscape's products were separated into 'domestic version' and 'international version'. For those 'international' products, symmetric key length was limited to 40-bit, RSA private key was limited to 512-bit, and all of the above keys were easy to break even back to that days. Along with the raise of Internet and opensource software, many great cryptography system are used widely, the effect of the limit of cryptography export is greatly reduced, but the limit was indeed a problem back to the 1990s.

## SSLeay

In 1995, Tim Hudson who worked for Bond University in Australia, had several projects which needed to use SSL. But due to the limit of export of cryptography from the U.S., the only way he could obtain SSL was to use the export version of Netscape products and purchase their license. According to Tim Hudson, that would had some issues:

1. First, it required a patent license from RSA Data Security (now RSA Security LLC).
2. Second, it was expensive, USD 30,000 at that time.
3. Last, Netscape didn't offer strong encryption except weakened 40-bit export form.

From Tim Hudson's point of view, even though he used the expensive Netscape products, all he got was only weakened cryptography, and this would not resolve the problem he met in his project, so at last, he decided to implement a new SSL library from scratch and made it useful in his projects. Then Tim asked Eric Young, who was working for his Ph.D. in Bond University, to implement a new SSL library together. Both of Eric and Tim are Alumni of the University of Queensland. Since Eric had already implemented DES cipher and had more spare time, so Eric was mainly decided to implement the new SSL library itself and Tim went to deal with application side compatibility, documentation and user issues. The new SSL library was named after Eric's full name 'Eric Andrew Young', SSLeay, read as S-S-L-E-A-Y. SSLeay supported SSLv2, SSLv3 and TLSv1, and most of its APIs are almost the same to today's OpenSSL. You can some old documentation about SSLeay at [http://www.umich.edu/~x509/ssleay/](http://www.umich.edu/~x509/ssleay/)

In August 1998, Eric and Tim joined RSA Data Security, and developed SSL-C for RSA Data Security. SSL-C is an SSL SDK used in the BSAFE product of RSA Data Security. At the same time, SSLeay stopped developing and no future releases any more. In 2007, Tim left RSA Data Security and was back to operate a company called Cryptsoft, which was started by Tim and Eric before they joining RSA Data Security. In 2012, Tim became a parnter of OpenSSL Foundation and one of the core development team in 2014.

Previous to working for RSA Data Security, Eric and Tim worked at a company called C2Net for around one and a half years, developing SSLeay. This working experience led to the birth of OpenSSL.

## C2Net

C2Net was a company based in California that provided cryptography software, founded in 1994. In the products the company developed, including web browser, web server and proxy server software, etc, there were full-support for encrytion to protect user's data. In 1997, C2Net opened a branch in Europe, Mark J. Cox was the Managing Director of C2Net Europe Ltd, he was in charge of development of international products of C2Net. As the same time, Eric and Time also joined C2Net in 1997, to develop SSLeay, which was used in those international products of C2Net to provide SSL and cryptographic functionality.

At that time, the primary product that C2Net offered is a web server named Stronghold, which supported SSL/TLS protocol and strong encryption alogorithms, and competed with web server software of Netscape. Stronghold was the only one that provided strong encryption globally among commercial web server software products. That was because Stronghold was developed outside the United States (In Europe and Australia). Anyway, C2Net needed to pay for RSA patent until it expired in 2000.

In 1998, Tim and Eric left C2Net, and joined RSA Data Security. In 2000, C2Net was acquired by Red Hat and Mark Cox worked as Senior Director of Product Security for Red Hat till now.

> C2Net
> 
> C2Net played a very important role in the history of Internet security, read more at: [https://awe.com/mark/history/c2net.html](https://awe.com/mark/history/c2net.html) and more info about Stronghold at: [https://awe.com/mark/history/stronghold.html](https://awe.com/mark/history/stronghold.html)

## OpenSSL

When Tim and Eric left C2Net in 1998, Mark decided to launch a new opensource project to succeed SSLeay, that's the OpenSSL. OpenSSL then replaced SSLeay in the products of C2Net and was widely used as a successful opensource software.

From the first release 0.9.1c in 1998, to the latest 1.1.0 branch, OpenSSL project has experinced ups and downs. The most significant event that ever influnced the project was the 'Heartbleed' vulnerability in 2014.

> Heartbleed
> 
> [http://heartbleed.com/](http://heartbleed.com/), the impact is that attacker could read the memory data in HTTPS servers and eventually recover a lot of important information including private keys, user passwords etc.

After Heartbleed was disclosed, Linux Foundation initialed a project named CII (Core Infrastructure Initiatives), which aimed to help improving the quality of Internet infrastructure software. The project CII collaborated with companies including IBM, Microsoft, Intel, AWS etc to fund some key-role opensource project to help them be better and more secure. OpenSSL was among the first projects that were funded by CII undoubtedly and this ended the 'underfunded' status of OpenSSL, which was only about USD 2,000 per year by donation. CII sponsored two full-time OpenSSL core developers and desired to get OpenSSL well-developed.

At the time Heartbleed was disclosed, OpenBSD and Google forked OpenSSL respectively, they started to go with their own SSL/TLS library. Their libraries were called LibreSSL (OpenBSD fork) and BoringSSL (Google fork). LibreSSL was forked from OpenSSL by OpenBSD in April 2014, its object is to refactor OpenSSL and enhance the security. The first release of LibreSSL was in July 2014, with the version 2.0.0. In LibreSSL, plenty of legacy and useless code were removed and some some new features were introduced, such as ChaCha and Poly1305. In Jun 2014, Google forked OpenSSL as BoringSSL. BoringSSL didn't aim to replace OpenSSL as a generic SSL library, instead, it was more like a Google-customized SSL library to support Goolge's own requirements, and was primarily used in Chrome and Android.

According to Mark Cox, "OpenSSL is likely to be the most useful library for general purpose needs, and the changes post Heartbleed (having dedicated team members, responding to security issues, published policies, obtaining CII badging) should hope to change the brand
impression to one which is positive". For LibreSSL and BoringSSL, OpenSSL likes to stay good relationships with both teams and collaborates for security issues with them.